# Project Data Warehouse

## Project description

In this project, we want to setup a Data Warehouse in AWS Redshift.
A music streaming startup with a growing user base and song database wants to migrate to AWS Redshift.
The user activity and songs data resides in json files in S3 buckets. The goal of the current project is to build an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3 buckets, stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of dimensional tables for their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

## Song Dataset
We will be working with two datasets that reside in S3.

#### Song Dataset:
It's a subset of real data from [Million Song Dataset](https://labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/millionsong/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID.

Sample Data:
```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```

## Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this  [event simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim)  based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files in the dataset are partitioned by year and month.

Sample Data:
```
{"artist":null,"auth":"Logged In","firstName":"Walter","gender":"M","itemInSession":0,"lastName":"Frye","length":null,"level":"free","location":"San Francisco-Oakland-Hayward, CA","method":"GET","page":"Home","registration":1540919166796.0,"sessionId":38,"song":null,"status":200,"ts":1541105830796,"userAgent":"\"Mozilla\/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_9_4) AppleWebKit\/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome\/36.0.1985.143 Safari\/537.36\"","userId":"39"}
```

## How to run

1. To run this project you will need to fill the following information, and save it as *dwh.cfg* in the project root folder.

```
KEY=
SECRET=

[CLUSTER]
HOST=
DB_NAME=
DB_USER=
DB_PASSWORD=
DB_PORT=

[IAM_ROLE]
ARN=''

[S3]
LOG_DATA=''
LOG_JSONPATH=''
SONG_DATA=''

[DWH]
DWH_CLUSTER_TYPE=multi-node
DWH_NUM_NODES=4
DWH_NODE_TYPE=dc2.large

DWH_IAM_ROLE_NAME=
DWH_CLUSTER_IDENTIFIER=
DWH_DB=
DWH_DB_USER=
DWH_DB_PASSWORD=
DWH_PORT=
```

2. Run the cells of *create_redshift_cluster.ipynb* notebook up till Step 4 to set up the needed cloud infrastructure on AWS for this project.


3. Run the *create_tables* script to set up the database staging and analytical tables

    `$ python create_tables.py`

4. Run the *etl* script to extract data from the files in S3, stage it in redshift, and finally store it in the dimensional tables.

    `$ python create_tables.py`

5. Then go back to Step 5 of *create_cluster.ipynb* notebook to check the commands are executing and everything is working fine. Finally, clean up all your resources and make sure all AWS resources have been properly shut.

## Project structure

This project includes five script files:

- create_redshift_cluster.ipynb is where the AWS components for this project are created programmatically, along with a few queries which has been made to validate that the created star schema has been completed successfully.
- create_table.py is where the star schema in Redshift, consisting of fact and dimension tables are created.
- etl.py is where data gets loaded from S3 buckets into staging tables on Redshift and then inserted into the analytics tables on Redshift.
- sql_queries.py is where SQL statements are defined, which are then used by etl.py, create_table.py and create_redshift_cluster.ipynb.
- README.md is current file with basic project description and instruction.

## Data Warehouse Schema

####  Fact Table
- fact_songplay - records in event data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong -
```
    songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent
```
#### Dimension Tables
- dim_user - users in the app -
```
    user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
```    
- dim_song - songs in music database -
```
    song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
```    
- dim_artist - artists in music database -
```
    artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude
```    
- dim_time - timestamps of records in songplays -
```
    start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday
```

## Queries and Results

Number of rows in each table:

| Table            | rows  |
|---               | --:   |
| staging_events   | 8056  |
| staging_songs    | 14896 |
| artists          | 10025 |
| songplays        | 666   |
| songs            | 29792 |
| time             |  8023 |
| users            |  105  |


### Steps followed on this project

1. Create Table Schemas
- Write a SQL CREATE statement for each of these tables in sql_queries.py
- Complete the logic in create_tables.py to connect to the database and create these tables
- Write SQL DROP statements to drop tables in the beginning of - create_tables.py if the tables already exist. This way, you can run create_tables.py whenever you want to reset your database and test your ETL pipeline.
- Launch a redshift cluster and create an IAM role that has read access to S3.
- Add redshift database and IAM role info to dwh.cfg.
- Test by running create_tables.py and checking the table schemas in your redshift database. You can use Query Editor in the AWS Redshift console for this.

2. Build ETL Pipeline
- Implement the logic in etl.py to load data from S3 to staging tables on Redshift.
- Implement the logic in etl.py to load data from staging tables to analytics tables on Redshift.
- Test by running etl.py after running create_tables.py and running the analytic queries on your Redshift database to compare your results with the expected results.
- Delete your redshift cluster when finished.
